docs: Add migration guide for upgrading to Serverpod 3.5 (#563)
serverpod/serverpod_docs: docs/11-upgrading/01-upgrade-to-three-five.md

---
title: Upgrade to 3.5
description: Upgrade your Serverpod 3.4 project to 3.5 (Jetstream) by adopting serverpod start, the embedded Postgres option, and the new agent skills.
---

<!-- markdownlint-disable MD025 -->

# Upgrade to 3.5

Serverpod 3.5 (Jetstream) ships a new development workflow (`serverpod start`), an embedded Postgres option, and built-in agent skills. The changes are mostly opt-in: your existing 3.4 project keeps working with small updates.

This guide walks through the upgrade and should take about 15 minutes.

## Before you start

- Your project is on the latest Serverpod 3.4.x release.
- Your project compiles and tests pass.
- You've committed your current state to git so you can roll back if needed.

## Update the Serverpod CLI

Install the 3.5 CLI:

```bash

> $ dart pub global activate serverpod_cli 3.5.0-beta.9

Author: `dart pub global activate serverpod_cli 3.5.0-beta.9` is fine here. That is what we would change all the pages to eventually.

> ```

Reviewer: Suggestion: We can no longer rely on `pub global` because the CLI uses build hooks due to the SQLite dependency. We need to use `dart install` from now on.

Verify the version:

```bash
$ serverpod version
```

## Update your project dependencies

In each package's `pubspec.yaml` (`<project>_server`, `<project>_client`, `<project>_flutter`), bump the Serverpod packages to 3.5. Serverpod prefers an exact version pin over a caret range to keep the CLI and the packages in sync:

```yaml
dependencies:
  serverpod: 3.5.0-beta.9
  serverpod_client: 3.5.0-beta.9      # in the client and Flutter packages
  serverpod_flutter: 3.5.0-beta.9     # in the Flutter package
```

Also bump the Dart SDK constraint in the root `pubspec.yaml` and `<project>_server/pubspec.yaml` to match the 3.5 minimum:

```yaml
environment:
  sdk: '^3.10.3'
```

> From the project's root folder, refresh dependencies (Dart workspaces resolve all sub-packages in one command), then regenerate the server and client code:

Reviewer: Comment: Workspaces was only introduced in version 3.3.0, and for new projects, so not all projects upgrading to 3.5 will use it. I also think we have never added a guide on how to adopt workspaces for an existing project - although this just Dart tooling.

Reviewer: Just found [this comment about migrating to use workspaces](https://github.com/serverpod/serverpod/issues/3193#issuecomment-3880082579).

```bash
$ dart pub upgrade
$ serverpod generate
```

## Generate the 3.5 migration

> 3.5 adds a few new internal Serverpod tables and updates some indexes (such as `serverpod_future_call_claim` and indexes on `serverpod_log` and `serverpod_query_log`). Create a migration that captures these schema deltas so your database can be brought up to date:

Reviewer: Suggestion(NIT): Avoid starting the sentence with a number.

I would also avoid mentioning the table names, since they are a kind of "implementation detail" - although I think it is worth mentioning the indexes for performance improvement on Insights.

```suggestion
Version 3.5 adds a few new internal Serverpod tables and updates some indexes to greatly improve logs performance on Insights. Create a migration that captures these schema deltas so your database can be brought up to date:
```

```bash

> $ serverpod create-migration

Reviewer: Suggestion: Maybe suggest with a tag also to highlight that it is just upgrades?

```suggestion
```bash
$ serverpod create-migration --tag "upgrade-3.5"
```

```

This writes a new migration to `<project>_server/migrations/`. It will be applied to your database in the next step.

## Adopt the new development workflow

> 3.5 replaces the `docker compose up` + `dart bin/main.dart` + `flutter run` triad with a single command, `serverpod start`, which runs the server, the database, and your Flutter app together with hot reload. Before running it, choose how to handle the database.

Reviewer: Suggestion: I would be a bit more verbose here on explaining the "why" we changed the workflow first, to then explain the "how".

### Choose your data store

You can either switch to the new embedded Postgres or keep your existing Docker Postgres. The choice depends on whether you have development data you need to keep.

> **Path A: switch to the embedded Postgres.** Add `dataPath` to the database section of `<project>_server/config/development.yaml` and `<project>_server/config/testing.yaml`:

Reviewer: Suggestion: Use a h4 for the Path A, then explain a bit on what it means before showing how to do. Also worth making it clear that it can't be used for production.

It is specially useful documento what is the embedded Postgres, how it works and pros/cons, because they can also influence on the migration decision:

- Pros: Easy to launch; no need for docker; no port conflict; delete the folder to cleanup.
- Cons: Tests must run with --concurrency=1; must be started from Dart to be manually accessed.

For the "how it works", take a look on the `EmbeddedPostgres` doc comments.

```suggestion
#### Switch to the embedded Postgres

<!-- Explanation here -->

Add `dataPath` to the database section of `<project>_server/config/development.yaml` and `<project>_server/config/testing.yaml`:
```

```yaml
database:
  host: localhost
  port: 8090
  name: <project>
  user: postgres
  dataPath: .serverpod/dev/pgdata
```

For `testing.yaml`, use a separate directory, for example `dataPath: .serverpod/test/pgdata`.

:::warning

The embedded Postgres uses a fresh data directory, separate from your Docker volumes. If you have seeded development data you need to keep, follow Path B, or import your data into the new directory after switching.

:::

**Path B: keep your Docker Postgres.** No config change. You'll pass `--docker` to `serverpod start` so it uses your existing `docker-compose.yaml`.

> 

Reviewer: Suggestion: Since this is the path of least resistance, I would show this option first. It communicates that the experience works by just using a flag instead of loading the cognitive context of the embedded Postgres right at the start.

:::warning

> Make sure Docker is running before `serverpod start --docker`. If it isn't, `serverpod start` may fall back to the embedded Postgres path and connect your app to an empty database. This is harmless, but it can look like your data disappeared. Your Docker data is still in its volume. Start Docker and re-run `serverpod start --docker` to reconnect.

Reviewer: Suggestion: You actually can start `serverpod start --docker` without docker running, and it will start for you. The only behavior difference is that it will only stop the docker-compose if the command started. If it was already running, it is on the user to tear it down.

<img width="415" height="156" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b0c5c641-6fe2-4372-b623-401a29951a62" />

There is also no relation between the `serverpod start` and the embedded Postgres. The start can only start or not docker based on the `--docker` flag. What starts the embedded Postgres is the server process itself - similar to how SQLite works - if the `dataPath` is present on the database config.

Author: The fallback I observed was driven by dataPath being in the config, not by --docker. I will the warning to attribute it to the right cause.

:::

### Start the server

From the project's root folder, run:

```bash
$ serverpod start            # Path A (embedded Postgres)
# or:
$ serverpod start --docker   # Path B (Docker Postgres)
```

> The first run compiles the native build hooks (this can take ~30 seconds) and applies the migration you generated above. The server then starts, watches your project, and hot-reloads on save.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Missing the mention for starting the Flutter app. Might also be worth noting that it is possible to configure the flutter devide on the `start command` and add a reference for how to use it with VS Code-like IDEs (the `launch.json` that we ship with new projects that enables using `start` alongside the debugger).

## Add the agent skills (optional)

3.5 ships AI agent skills (for editors like Claude Code and Cursor) and an MCP server. Install them with:

```bash
$ dart install skills
```

From your project's root folder, install the skills for your editor:

```bash
$ skills get --ide cursor
```

> Replace `cursor` with the editor you use: `antigravity`, `claude`, `cline`, `codex`, `copilot`, `cursor`, `opencode`, or `generic`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Replace `cursor` with the editor you use: `antigravity`, `claude`, `cline`, `codex`, `copilot`, `cursor`, `opencode`, or `generic` to install at `.agents` folder.
```

## Production deployment notes

Your production Dockerfile pattern (`dart compile exe bin/main.dart -o bin/server`) continues to work in 3.5. Build hooks run automatically during compilation. The only change you may need is to bump the Dart SDK base image to 3.10.x or newer:

```dockerfile
FROM dart:3.10.3 AS build

> ```

Reviewer: Question: Is this true? I can't get it to work locally:

<img width="500" height="34" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/5e09fff3-c6ed-42bf-a04f-fd309a1c9ebf" />

The workflow with `dart build` is a little different because it does not produce a single `exe`, but a bundle with the `exe` + native libraries.

Author: Great catch on the build hooks. Local testing confirms dart build cli is the replacement and produces a bundle at build/cli/<platform>/bundle/{bin,lib}/. A question before I write the new Dockerfile pattern into the migration guide:

- The framework's own Dockerfile still uses dart compile exe and will fail under 3.5. Worth a separate issue to update the templates?

Reviewer: Fix on the way: https://github.com/serverpod/serverpod/pull/5260

> The embedded Postgres is a development convenience and does not run in production. Use a managed Postgres for your deployed server: [Serverpod Cloud](/cloud) provisions one for you automatically, or you can connect to a managed service like Cloud SQL or RDS.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Move this note to the embedded Postgres section, since it makes users understand that they should not change the `production.yaml` and `staging.yaml` files.

## What's new in 3.5

- **`serverpod start` TUI**: hot reload on save, **R** to hot restart, **M** to create a migration, **A** to apply migrations, **P** to apply a repair migration.
- **Flutter app spawning** from `serverpod start` so the Flutter app runs alongside the server in the same TUI.
- **AI agent skills and MCP server** scaffolded during `serverpod create`; existing projects opt in with `dart install skills` and `skills get`.
- **Embedded Postgres**: zero-Docker development via `dataPath`.
- **SQLite database support** as an alternative dialect to Postgres.
- **Client-side database generation** for the Flutter app.
- **`jsonb` column support** with GIN index operator classes, and **`dynamic` fields** on models and endpoints.
- **`unique` keyword** for simpler unique indexes in model files.
- **`upsert` and `upsertRow`** on the ORM, and **`asc()` / `desc()`** convenience methods on orderable columns.
- **Recurring future calls** via the new claim-based scheduling.
- **OAuth2 PKCE Flutter web redirect** for sign-in flows.
- **Health endpoints** on the built-in webserver.

> - **IDE and agent selection** in `serverpod create`.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Move this upfront to make users want to upgrade, with a special highlight to the parts that are related to the new DX.

Author: The audience for this guide is users who've already decided to upgrade; they came here for the procedure. "What's new" at the end works as a reference they can scan after the upgrade lands, without pushing the procedural steps further down the page. I'd keep it where it is, but if you want a stronger hook upfront, I can add a one-liner in the intro highlighting the headline DX changes (TUI, embedded Postgres, skills).

Reviewer: I think the stronger hook serves the purpose!

### Migration concerns

These are not new features but can affect existing 3.4 projects:

- **`serverpod_database` package extraction.** Database types and helpers moved from `serverpod` into a new `serverpod_database` package. If you imported database APIs directly from `serverpod`, some of those imports now come from `serverpod_database`. The compiler will point out any imports that need updating after you run `dart pub upgrade`.

> - **Logging revamp.** The logging API was reworked. If you have custom log handling, review your code against the new API.

Reviewer: Suggestion: I would remove this mention, as these changes do not affect users in any way. The `serverpod_database` is meant to be an internal package and all models are re-exported from the places they already existed. The logging was also an in-place refactor that did not touch public interfaces, so the note might create doubt with no need.

## Troubleshooting

### Port conflicts on `serverpod start`

> A previous `serverpod start` or a separate Postgres process may still be listening on 8090 or 8080. Stop the other process, or run on different ports.

Reviewer: Suggestion: Mention that the current limitation on running two servers can still happen, for users to understand that this is not due to `serverpod start`, but a limitation that exists currently and still applies.

- **Embedded Postgres**: zero-Docker development via `dataPath`.
- **SQLite database support** as an alternative dialect to Postgres.
- **Client-side database generation** for the Flutter app.
- **`jsonb` column support** with GIN index operator classes, and **`dynamic` fields** on models and endpoints.
- **`unique` keyword** for simpler unique indexes in model files.
- **`upsert` and `upsertRow`** on the ORM, and **`asc()` / `desc()`** convenience methods on orderable columns.
- **Recurring future calls** via the new claim-based scheduling.
- **OAuth2 PKCE Flutter web redirect** for sign-in flows.
- **Health endpoints** on the built-in webserver.
- **IDE and agent selection** in `serverpod create`.

## Troubleshooting

### Port conflicts on startup

Running more than one Serverpod server on the same machine can conflict on the default ports (8080 for the main server, 8090 for the database). This is a long-standing limitation, not specific to `serverpod start`. Stop the other server, or run on different ports.

### Agent skills aren't picked up after install

> Run `skills get` again from the project's root folder. Some editors, like Cursor, require enabling the MCP server in their settings.

Reviewer 2: Suggestion: I´m thinking of how to get feedback if people are struggling. We could add a line at the end about reaching out to us if you get stuck. Either through a link to the community page, or directly to discord and github discussions. Just a thought.

```bash
$ serverpod create-migration --tag "upgrade-3.5"
```

This writes a new migration to `<project>_server/migrations/`. It will be applied to your database in the next step.

## Adopt the new development workflow

Version 3.5 introduces a faster, integrated development workflow. The new `serverpod start` command runs your server, your Flutter app, and (optionally) your database in a single watch process with hot reload, replacing the manual `docker compose up` + `dart bin/main.dart` + `flutter run` triad. The result is a tighter edit-save-see-result loop and built-in tooling for migrations, hot restart, and agent skills.

Before running it, choose how to handle the database.

### Choose your data store

You have two paths. Pick the one that fits where you are today; both work with `serverpod start`.

#### Keep your Docker Postgres (easiest upgrade)

If you've been developing against a Docker Postgres on 3.4, you can keep it without changing your config. Pass `--docker` to `serverpod start` so it uses your existing `docker-compose.yaml`:

```bash
$ serverpod start --docker
```

> `serverpod start --docker` will start Docker for you if it isn't running, and will tear down the compose stack on exit if it was the one that started it.

Reviewer: Suggestion(NIT): Avoid starting the sentence with a symbol to make the text more fluid. Same for the `dataPath` on the beginning of some paragraphs and sentences below.

For `testing.yaml`, use a separate directory, for example `dataPath: .serverpod/test/pgdata`.

Once `dataPath` is set, `serverpod start` uses the embedded Postgres automatically:

```bash
$ serverpod start
```

`dataPath` belongs in `development.yaml` and `testing.yaml` only. For production, use a managed Postgres: [Serverpod Cloud](/cloud) provisions one for you, or you can connect to a managed service like Cloud SQL or RDS. Do not add `dataPath` to `production.yaml` or `staging.yaml`.

:::warning

> If you've added `dataPath` to your config and also pass `--docker`, the server connects to the embedded Postgres rather than your Docker Postgres. `dataPath` is honored by the server process regardless of the `--docker` flag, which only controls whether `serverpod start` brings up the `docker-compose` stack. If that's not what you wanted, your Docker volume is still intact: remove `dataPath` from your config to use the Docker Postgres again.

Reviewer: Comment: Great explanation!

:::

### Start the server

The first run compiles the native build hooks (this can take about 30 seconds) and applies the migration you generated above. The server then starts and watches your project; saving a file hot-reloads the code.

> `serverpod start` also launches your Flutter app, in Chrome by default. Pass `--flutter-device <name>` to target a different device. For IDE debugging, projects scaffolded with 3.5 include a `launch.json` that runs `serverpod start` with the debugger attached; you can copy that file into your existing project from a fresh 3.5 scaffold if you want the same setup.

Reviewer: Suggestion: We have changed the default in recent commits: now, we launch Flutter app as `webserver` by default and hook up the user default browser. The rest of being able to pass `--flutter-device <name>` is still valid.

The fastest fix is to copy the updated Dockerfile from a fresh 3.5 project's `<project>_server/Dockerfile`. The key changes from the 3.4 pattern are:

- **Build from the project root**, not the server directory, so Dart workspaces resolve correctly:

    ```bash
    $ docker build -f <project>_server/Dockerfile .
    ```

- Use **`dart build cli`** instead of `dart compile exe`:

    ```dockerfile
    RUN dart build cli --target bin/main.dart --output build
    ```

- **Copy the bundle directory**, not a single executable. The bundle contains `bin/main` and `lib/*` (the native libraries):

    ```dockerfile
    COPY --from=build /app/<project>_server/build/bundle/ ./
    ```

- **Update ENTRYPOINT** to point at the bundled binary:

    ```dockerfile
    ENTRYPOINT ./bin/server --mode=$runmode --server-id=$serverid --logging=$logging --role=$role
    ```

- **Bump the Dart SDK base image** to 3.10.x or newer:

    ```dockerfile
    FROM dart:3.10.3 AS build

>     ```

Reviewer: Suggestion: To avoid polluting the guide, is it worth just referencing the link of the `Dockerfile` in the `serverpod` repo? I think that seeing a complete working Dockerfile will be easier for users to upgrade than seeing individual changes (specially if they have changed their file).
